In this lesson I'm going to show you how
to create a function definition.
Actually we'll create two function
definitions, a very simple
one and then one that's a bit more
complex.
So, let's start a new Python program.
We're gonna call this functions1.py.
To create a function in Python, you start
with the keyword def for define.
That's followed by the name of the
function.
Every function must have a name, except
for
a special class of functions called
anonymous functions.
This first function we are going to create
is used to square a number.
So we're going to call it square.
Following the function name is an optional
list of
data called parameters that will be
supplied to the function.
They're optional because you can't have
functions that
don't require any data being passed into
them.
But because we're going to square numbers
in this
function, then we do want a number to
square.
So that will be our parameter.
A single piece of data number.
After the list of parameters, then we have
a
colon to signify that we're moving into
the function body.
So we indent into the function body.
The square function is an example
of a function called a value-returning
function.
We call it value returning because we're
passing a number into the function
definition.
And the function definition returns the
value of the number squared.
So that's why square is called a value
returning function.
And all value returning functions have to
have what is called a return statement.
In this case, that will be the only
statement in our function body.
And all we do to square a number is
multiply it times itself.
So that's what we're going to return.
We're going to return the parameter number
times itself.
And that's the end of our function body
and the end of our function definition.
So, that was a very simple function to
create.
Now, let's look at a little more complex
example.
This time we're going to write a function
that counts the number of vowels in a
string.
So, the name of our function is going to
be numVowels.
I like to make my function names somewhat
pneumonic, but not too long.
And then the parameter with the piece of
data
that we're going to work with will be any
string.
However long of a string of characters we
want to use to count Vowels.
So we follow that by the colon to signify
the beginning of the function body.
Now this time, we have to do quite a
bit more coding than we did for the square
example.
First thing we want to do, is to make sure
that all of our characters are in the same
case.
So we're going to lower case the string
first.
So the first thing we're going to do is
call the built
in function lower, to make sure all the
characters are lower case.
The next thing we need to do is create a
variable to store the count of vowels.
So we have a variable count and we'll set
its initial value to zero.
Then we wanna loop to loop through the
string.
So that we can count vowel.
So we'll have a for loop and we'll say for
i in range the length of the string.
And inside the for loop, we're going to
look at each letter of the string.
So let's string sub i, and compare it to
one of the vowels.
So if string sub i is a, or string sub i
is equal to e.
Or let's move down to the next line.
And to do that, we'll need a back slash
right here.
Or if string sub i is i or string sub i
equals o.
Or, I'm gonna backslash because we're
dropping down to the next line.
String sub i is equal to u.
If any of those is true, then we want to
increment count by one.
And here I'm going to use the
more efficient composite assignment
operator, plus equal.
Which is just shortcut for saying count is
equal to count plus one.
I've avoided using composite assignment
operators up til now.
But now you should be comfortable enough
with your
coding that we can use little shortcuts
like that.
So, we're simply gonna loop through the
string.
And check to see if the letter that we're
on is a vowel.
If it is, then we're going to increment
our count by one.
And that's all we have to to do until
we're ready to complete the functions.
So that will go outside the for loop.
So we go back to the level of the for loop
where we began the for loop.
And we type return count.
So the main work of the function occurs
right in this highlighted code.
And once we've looped through the complete
string, and we've counted all the vowels.
Then we can return that count.
That will be the return value of the
function.
So with that we're ready to end this
lesson on function definitions.
And let's move to the next lesson where
we're
going to talk about how to call the
function.
To have it do the computation that we've
defined for it.